Content
Skip to Main ContentAccessibility Help

MENU
Search
Sign In
news
Top Stories
Local
Climate
World
Canada
Politics
Indigenous
Opinion
The National
More 
School roof collapses on northern Manitoba First Nation | CBC News Loaded
Manitoba
School roof collapses on northern Manitoba First Nation
Social Sharing
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Reddit
LinkedIn
Engineers expected to assess damage on Tuesday
CBC News · Posted: Apr 11, 2023 8:34 AM EDT | Last Updated: 5 hours ago
Snow is piled in front of a two-storey building. The overhang of the lower level is collapsed and leaning forward.
The weight of snow in O-Pipon-Na-Piwin Cree Nation has caused the Thunderbird School roof to collapse, a news release says. (Submitted by Manitoba Keewatinowi Okimakanak)
A remote northern Manitoba First Nation that declared a state of emergency last month following the deaths of three people is now facing another challenge.

The roof of the Thunderbird School in O-Pipon-Na-Piwin Cree Nation collapsed over the Easter weekend.

The weight of heavy, wet snow proved to be too much for the roof, says a news release from Manitoba Keewatinowi Okimakanak, a political advocacy group that represents 26 First Nations in northern Manitoba

Engineers are expected to be in the community at South Indian Lake, about 130 kilometres northwest of Thompson, on Tuesday to assess the damage.

Shirley Ducharme, the chief of O-Pipon-Na-Piwin Cree Nation, says the news of the roof's collapse didn't surprise her. 

The building was almost 50 years old and was a wood structure, making it prone to mildew, mould and rot, Chief Ducharme told CBC Manitoba Up to Speed Host Faith Fundal. 

"As a First Nation we've been advocating for a new school," she said. "There's been a lot of concerns regarding structural concerns over the past years." 

A woman in a light purple sweater talks to those in attendance at a media conference
O-Pipon-Na-Piwin Cree Nation chief Shirley Ducharme says there was a lot of concern about the structural integrity of Thunderbird School. In recent years the school had undergone extensive repairs. (Ethan Butterfield/CBC)
In recent years the school had undergone extensive repairs as the walls had cracks in them, some of the support columns had been replaced and there had been a washout which had temporarily shut the school down. Most recently in the fall while replacing the flooring, mould was found in the walls and asbestos in the tiles. 

Wheels were already in motion to get a new school for the community but disagreements with the federal government about location have stunted the process, Ducharme said. 

According to Ducharme the government says putting a water line in the area chosen by the community would be too expensive.   

"We're trying to reason with them to look into the future and help our nation," She said. 

"We're saying it's only going to benefit us as a community. We don't have running water, so these other homes can be hooked up."

It is not known how long the community will be without a school or how much repairs will cost.

'Our people are dying': Manitoba First Nation declares state of emergency
Northern Manitoba school renamed, after documents revealed former namesake tied to residential school system
Freezing rain is forecast for the area this week, which could further damage the school, the release says.

CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC News
Corrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report error
Popular Now in News
1
CBC INVESTIGATES
Troubled Calgary builder leaves Edmonton homebuyers with mortgages to pay on unfinished homes
355 reading now
2
Trudeau Foundation president, board resign, citing 'politicization' of China-linked donation
271 reading now
3
Tupperware shares tank as company warns it may go out of business
143 reading now
4
What we know about the leaked U.S. Pentagon documents on the Ukraine war — and potential impact
136 reading now
5
Manhattan district attorney sues Republican Jim Jordan over Trump prosecution
112 reading now
Footer Links
My Account
Profile
CBC Gem
Newsletters
About CBC Accounts
Connect with CBC
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
Mobile
RSS
Podcasts
Contact CBC
Submit Feedback
Help Centre
Audience Relations, CBC
P.O. Box 500 Station A
Toronto, ON
Canada, M5W 1E6

Toll-free (Canada only):
1-866-306-4636

About CBC
Corporate Info
Sitemap
Reuse & Permission
Terms of Use
Privacy
Jobs
Our Unions
Independent Producers
Political Ads Registry
AdChoices
Services
Ombudsman
Corrections and Clarifications
Public Appearances
Commercial Services
CBC Shop
Doing Business with Us
Renting Facilities
Radio Canada International
CBC Lite
Accessibility
It is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.

Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

About CBC Accessibility
Accessibility Feedback

©2023 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved.
Visitez Radio-Canada.ca
