Content
Skip to Main ContentAccessibility Help

MENU
Search
Sign In
news
Top Stories
Local
Climate
World
Canada
Politics
Indigenous
Opinion
The National
More 
UPEI administration requests arbitration as striking faculty ponders next move | CBC News Loaded
PEI
UPEI administration requests arbitration as striking faculty ponders next move
Social Sharing
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Reddit
LinkedIn
Arbitration wouldn't address main issues, faculty association says

Shane Ross · CBC News · Posted: Apr 11, 2023 7:27 PM EDT | Last Updated: 3 hours ago
UPEI faculty walking the picket line.
UPEI faculty members walk the picket line Tuesday as the strike enters its fourth week. (Julien Lecacheur/Radio-Canada)

2
 comments
Mediation between the University of Prince Edward Island and the school's faculty association broke down as the strike that's put classes on hold enters its fourth week.

Mediated talks between the parties ended after just three days this weekend. Now, UPEI's administration says it's asked that the process move on to interest arbitration. 

That means talks would continue, but students would also be able to return to class.

UPEI said in a release Tuesday the process would be led by Michelle Flaherty, the same facilitator who led the mediation talks.

Margot Rejskind, the lead negotiator for the UPEI Faculty Association, said faculty is still considering its next steps, but that it has concerns about having Flaherty as the arbitrator.

"For her to have been the mediator and then become the arbitrator in our view would be a very serious conflict of interest because she has been a party to all of the discussions," she said. "And so we do question the fact that they're even suggesting that."

A woman wearing a UPEI Faculty Association beanie hat.
Margot Rejskind, the lead negotiator for the UPEI Faculty Association, said faculty is still considering its next steps. (Tony Davis/CBC)
Rejskind said arbitration wouldn't deal with many of its members' concerns, such as "the fact that we don't have enough faculty, that we are so low on full-time faculty that we will be seeing programs collapse and close in the next few years."

She said about 40 per cent of its members are working on short-term sessional contracts maxing out at about $30,000 a year.

University committed to crediting students
In a notice published on the UPEI website, the university said it remains committed to crediting students with net savings from not paying faculty salaries while they're on strike. 

UPEI said in an effort to get a deal on the weekend, it offered to pay both the university and faculty member pension contributions for the time that they were on strike.

That would have amounted to $355,000 for the first three weeks of the strike, which would otherwise have been net savings available to students, UPEI said.

We are the big losers in this strike and we don't even have a say in the matter.​​​​​​
- Adam MacKenzie, UPEI student union president
The university said the faculty association countered with a back-to-work protocol that, in addition to paying both portions of pension and additional benefits, included 32 other items. 

"Among these items were additional cash pay outs of $2,000 per person plus 40 per cent of their lost wages for the strike they initiated," the notice said.

"This is in addition to their current non-taxable strike pay of $1,120/week for spending 10 hours on strike duty per week. This strike pay value is approximately equivalent to a gross annual salary of $96,000 if they had to pay taxes and standard regulatory and benefit deductions."

Government-imposed arbitration?
The university said it's hopeful interest arbitration could end the strike. But that process can't get started unless both parties agree or government steps in and uses legislation to impose arbitration.

No one from government would answer questions about what involvement the province might have in working to resolve this dispute.

The legislature has to reconvene by May 12 at the latest to elect a new speaker. Once that's happened, discussions to impose arbitration could get underway.

University of Prince Edward Island and striking faculty agree to mediation
UPEI faculty union rejects conditional proposal to resume talks
But Rejskind said UPEI shouldn't be waiting for the province to step in.

"It's important to note that the government can't act for several more weeks," she said.

"If that's what they're counting on, then the Board of Governors is acknowledging that there's the potential to completely lose the semester, and that they are comfortable with that."

Students frustrated with both sides
Adam MacKenzie.
Adam MacKenzie, president of the UPEI Student Union, says students are becoming increasingly impatient and anxious. (Julien Lecacheur/Radio-Canada)
UPEI student union president Adam MacKenzie said students are growing anxious and impatient while waiting for classes to resume — or the semester to be cancelled.

"I think there are some people who show their frustration towards the faculty association, some people show their frustration towards the administration, and I think the majority of people show their frustration towards both," he said. 

"They feel that both sides are not being courteous enough to students. We are the big losers in this strike and we don't even have a say in the matter."

MacKenzie said the student union supports the administration's request to enter the interest arbitration process.

"Time is of the essence, and arbitration is kind of the last hope that students have to be assured of our credits and no semester extension. So we are hoping to see arbitration be entered tomorrow or the day after."

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Shane Ross
Journalist

Shane Ross is a journalist with CBC News on Prince Edward Island. Previously, he worked as a newspaper reporter and editor in Halifax, Ottawa and Charlottetown. You can reach him at shane.ross@cbc.ca.

Follow Shane Ross on Twitter
With files from Jessica Doria-Brown

CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC News
Corrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report error
Popular Now in News
1
CBC INVESTIGATES
Troubled Calgary builder leaves Edmonton homebuyers with mortgages to pay on unfinished homes
355 reading now
2
Trudeau Foundation president, board resign, citing 'politicization' of China-linked donation
271 reading now
3
Tupperware shares tank as company warns it may go out of business
143 reading now
4
What we know about the leaked U.S. Pentagon documents on the Ukraine war — and potential impact
136 reading now
5
Manhattan district attorney sues Republican Jim Jordan over Trump prosecution
112 reading now
RECOMMENDED FOR YOU
?

Tupperware shares tank as company warns it may go out of business
Pete Evans
News -
Business

Troubled Calgary builder leaves Edmonton homebuyers with mortgages to pay on unfinished homes
Madeleine Cummings
News -
Canada -
Edmonton

Trudeau Foundation president, board resign, citing 'politicization' of China-linked donation
Richard Raycraft
News -
Politics

Alberta woman desperately trying to get rid of 133,000 Rum & Butter chocolate bars 
Sheena Goodyear
Radio -
As It Happens

Ontario rolls out 'ultra low' overnight hydro rate to encourage demand shift
News -
Canada -
Toronto
COMMENTS
To encourage thoughtful and respectful conversations, first and last names will appear with each submission to CBC/Radio-Canada's online communities (except in children and youth-oriented communities). Pseudonyms will no longer be permitted.

By submitting a comment, you accept that CBC has the right to reproduce and publish that comment in whole or in part, in any manner CBC chooses. Please note that CBC does not endorse the opinions expressed in comments. Comments on this story are moderated according to our Submission Guidelines. Comments are welcome while open. We reserve the right to close comments at any time.

Become a CBC Account Holder
Join the conversation  Create account

Already have an account?Log in


Jump to log in or sign Up
Join the conversation

ALL COMMENTS 2

NEWEST

All Comments

JR

Jonathan Richard
50 MIN AGO
Must be mad they actually have to go to classes and can’t teach from their kitchens making 100k+. Bunch of entitled babies wanting money for not working

REPLY
 0
SHAREFLAG

JS

Jim sentance
2 HRS AGO
The strike pay is just from money we've set aside by paying union dues for years. They make it sound like we're living high off the hog on our own savings. Typical of the "information" they give out. Like those excessive "32 items" we proposed in the back to work protocol, most of which would be just procedural things related to getting things back to normal.

REPLY
 1
SHAREFLAG
Footer Links
My Account
Profile
CBC Gem
Newsletters
About CBC Accounts
Connect with CBC
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
Mobile
RSS
Podcasts
Contact CBC
Submit Feedback
Help Centre
Audience Relations, CBC
P.O. Box 500 Station A
Toronto, ON
Canada, M5W 1E6

Toll-free (Canada only):
1-866-306-4636

About CBC
Corporate Info
Sitemap
Reuse & Permission
Terms of Use
Privacy
Jobs
Our Unions
Independent Producers
Political Ads Registry
AdChoices
Services
Ombudsman
Corrections and Clarifications
Public Appearances
Commercial Services
CBC Shop
Doing Business with Us
Renting Facilities
Radio Canada International
CBC Lite
Accessibility
It is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.

Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

About CBC Accessibility
Accessibility Feedback

©2023 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved.
Visitez Radio-Canada.ca
