Content
Skip to Main ContentAccessibility Help

MENU
Search
Sign In
news
Top Stories
Local
Climate
World
Canada
Politics
Indigenous
Opinion
The National
More 
English school district accepts findings in deaf education discrimination case | CBC News Loaded
Nfld. & Labrador
English school district accepts findings in deaf education discrimination case
Social Sharing
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Reddit
LinkedIn
NLESD ‘accepts responsibility’ for systemic education issues for Carter Churchill
Heather Gillis · CBC News · Posted: Apr 05, 2023 4:24 PM EDT | Last Updated: April 6

25
 comments
Carter sitting on a blanket outside in the summer. He is smiling.
Carter Churchill's family won a human rights case against the Newfoundland and Labrador English School Distrcit in March. (Submitted by Kimberly Churchill )
The Newfoundland and Labrador English School District says it accepts the findings of a human rights tribunal report that ordered it to provide Carter Churchill — a profoundly deaf child from Portugal Cove-St. Phillip's — with education and evaluation in American Sign Language and pay his family nearly $150,000 for discrimination.

Carter's parents, Todd and Kimberly Churchill, won the human rights case against the district in early March after a years-long fight to get their son the education he needed. Along with being deaf, Carter, who is 12 and uses ASL to communicate, has cerebral palsy and is non-verbal.

"The district does accept and fully accept and take responsibility for the systemic issues identified and the missed opportunities early in Carter's education and we fully understand that's what lead to the ruling of discrimination," the District's interim superintendent Terry Hall said Wednesday late afternoon.

Parents of deaf child win human rights case against N.L. school district
This boy uses ASL, but his teachers don't — and his parents have filed a human rights complaint
"Those missed opportunities resulted in him being socially isolated and impeded his development of social and language skills, furthering a tremendous communications divide during his early years," Hall wrote in a statement.

Hall doesn't blame any individual for the district's failure, but says the system "did not have a wholly informed perspective of his needs," and have apologized to the Churchill family.

The Churchills first filed a complaint against the district when Carter was in Kindergarten at Beachy Cove Elementary. The family said Carter needed help to communicate and develop language skills and engage in the school curriculum, but wasn't getting the proper supports. 

At that time the district said it had not discriminated against Carter, and asserted Carter was properly accommodated. 

Kimberly and Todd Churchill sitting at their kitchen table, hands crossed, looking concerned.
Kimberly and Todd Churchill say their deaf son, Carter, wasn't being accommodated in the classroom, along with other deaf children in the province. (Gary Locke/CBC)
The human rights commission ruled that the district failed to provide reasonable accommodation for Carter between 2016 and 2020 when he was in Kindergarten until Grade 3 at Beachy Cove Elementary. 

During these years, the report found that Carter experienced social isolation and had teachers who didn't know ASL or with training in teaching deaf children. 

When Carter was in Grade 4 the school district created a classroom for deaf children at East Point Elementary for eight children learning American Sign Language.

The Churchills say despite this development, Carter's ASL is not at the level it should be.

Parents of deaf student receive human rights award for their advocacy work
"It hurts, there's no doubt when … you're told that you failed a student even for a year or two or three, but again we're taking away that we improved upon that. We now have a service that is felt that's adequate," Hall said. 

The district had until March 31 to appeal the tribunal's decision, but will not do so.

"We will continue to improve ASL skills both in our students and in our staff," Hall said.

Kimberly and Todd Churchill in the living room playing with Carter, who is in a wheelchair.
The Churchills playing in their Portugal Cove-St. Phillip's home. (Bruce Tilley/CBC)
The Churchills have called the tribunal ruling a landmark decision, which will help protect other deaf children from discrimination. 

Meanwhile Hall says the NLESD will review programs to make sure they have appropriate services for students like Carter who have exceptionalities. 

"We'll take learnings from this to see if we can improve in other areas," said Hall. 

"We want the correct educational environment and resources for all our students and we want to make sure that they all have an opportunity to learn and learn appropriately and with the right resources," he said.

Read more from CBC Newfoundland and Labrador

CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC News
Corrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report error
Popular Now in News
1
CBC INVESTIGATES
Troubled Calgary builder leaves Edmonton homebuyers with mortgages to pay on unfinished homes
355 reading now
2
Trudeau Foundation president, board resign, citing 'politicization' of China-linked donation
271 reading now
3
Tupperware shares tank as company warns it may go out of business
143 reading now
4
What we know about the leaked U.S. Pentagon documents on the Ukraine war — and potential impact
136 reading now
5
Manhattan district attorney sues Republican Jim Jordan over Trump prosecution
112 reading now
COMMENTS
To encourage thoughtful and respectful conversations, first and last names will appear with each submission to CBC/Radio-Canada's online communities (except in children and youth-oriented communities). Pseudonyms will no longer be permitted.

By submitting a comment, you accept that CBC has the right to reproduce and publish that comment in whole or in part, in any manner CBC chooses. Please note that CBC does not endorse the opinions expressed in comments. Comments on this story are moderated according to our Submission Guidelines. Comments are welcome while open. We reserve the right to close comments at any time.

Become a CBC Account Holder
Join the conversation  Create account

Already have an account?Log in

Loading...
Footer Links
My Account
Profile
CBC Gem
Newsletters
About CBC Accounts
Connect with CBC
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
Mobile
RSS
Podcasts
Contact CBC
Submit Feedback
Help Centre
Audience Relations, CBC
P.O. Box 500 Station A
Toronto, ON
Canada, M5W 1E6

Toll-free (Canada only):
1-866-306-4636

About CBC
Corporate Info
Sitemap
Reuse & Permission
Terms of Use
Privacy
Jobs
Our Unions
Independent Producers
Political Ads Registry
AdChoices
Services
Ombudsman
Corrections and Clarifications
Public Appearances
Commercial Services
CBC Shop
Doing Business with Us
Renting Facilities
Radio Canada International
CBC Lite
Accessibility
It is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.

Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

About CBC Accessibility
Accessibility Feedback

©2023 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved.
Visitez Radio-Canada.ca
