Content
Skip to Main ContentAccessibility Help

MENU
Search
Sign In
news
Top Stories
Local
Climate
World
Canada
Politics
Indigenous
Opinion
The National
More 
SFU football alumni seeking injunction to reinstate axed varsity team | CBC News Loaded
British Columbia
SFU football alumni seeking injunction to reinstate axed varsity team
Social Sharing
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Reddit
LinkedIn
The university announced the elimination of its 57-year-old football program effective immediately on April 4

Karin Larsen · CBC News · Posted: Apr 11, 2023 7:36 PM EDT | Last Updated: 3 hours ago
A person in a hoodie walks over steps that have 'SFU' and a red logo painted over in a gradient.
Simon Fraser University football alumni are seeking an injunction to reinstate the varsity football team. (Ben Nelms/CBC)
One week after Simon Fraser University announced it was eliminating varsity football, team supporters say they will ask the courts to revive the 57-year-old program. 

The SFU Football Alumni Society will file an injunction against the Burnaby, B.C., school to reinstate its football program. The litigation is scheduled to be filed in B.C. Supreme Court on Wednesday, with the society doing so on behalf of seven players on the team.

"There's a contract in place holding the university and student-athletes responsible through athletic scholarships," said SFU Football Alumni Society president Mark Bailey.

"The student-athletes have fulfilled their commitment to the university to represent and compete. We are essentially asking that the university follow through with the commitment they had with the contracts that were created through these athletic scholarships."

On April 4, school president Joy Johnson announced in a written statement that SFU was discontinuing its football program, effective immediately.

Johnson said the team would not play the upcoming 2023 season due to the "ongoing uncertainty" caused by the NCAA Division II Lone Star Conference announcing it would drop SFU football beginning in 2024.

On the same day, SFU senior athletic director Theresa Hanson and vice-president and provost Wade Parkhouse met with players to deliver the news. Hanson told the team the decision to axe football was not financially motivated and called the process to join another conference "very complex." 

VIDEOAthletes devastated as Simon Fraser University ends its football program
"The university made a very difficult decision and felt that it was in the best interest to announce it now," Hanson said to the players.

According to Bailey, alumni were "shocked" to hear the news because Johnson made no mention of it in conversations between the two parties a week before the announcement.

He also questions how diligent university officials were in their attempts to keep the program alive.

B.C. football community in shock after SFU discontinues its varsity program
Bailey said an alumni committee struck to investigate places for the team to play next year and beyond — including the Lone Star Conference, National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA) and the Canada West conference of Canadian University U Sports — has produced encouraging conversations.

"To say they've made a decision that's best for student-athletes is completely untrue," he said. 

"We're not satisfied whatsoever with the information — or lack thereof — that's been presented by the university as justification for the decision they have made. I don't think there's been a proper consultation. There's definitely been no transparency, in my opinion, and a lack of inclusion." 

CFL commissioner Ambrosie asks for SFU football program to continue in Canada
There are also questions about what happens to the $2.5 million SFU football endowment fund, which provides about $125,000 to the program annually, if the team stays folded.

CBC has requested an interview with Johnson but has not heard back. On Tuesday, officials from Canada West said they would release a statement after meeting to discuss SFU football. The statement was not available at the time of publication.

Since the school's decision, there's been support for SFU football from the likes of SFU basketball alumnus and NBA coach Jay Triano, B.C. Lions owner Amar Doman, CFL Commissioner Randy Ambrosie and the CFL Players' Association.

Over its history, SFU has produced some of Canada's top football talent, including Lui Passaglia, Lemar Durant, Doug Brown, Angus Reid, Nick Hebler, Glen Suitor and Giulio Caravatta.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Karin Larsen
@CBCLarsen

Karin Larsen is a former Olympian and award winning sports broadcaster who covers news and sports for CBC Vancouver.

- With files from The Canadian Press

CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC News
Corrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report error
RELATED STORIES
Top stories from British Columbia
Popular YouTube adventurer tackles B.C.'s Chilliwack River in raft made from deadfall wood
Ex-Canucks forward Horvat apologizes for 'better than Vancouver' comment
AUDIO Kamloops councillor puts forward motion to ban drug use in public spaces
Popular Now in News
1
CBC INVESTIGATES
Troubled Calgary builder leaves Edmonton homebuyers with mortgages to pay on unfinished homes
355 reading now
2
Trudeau Foundation president, board resign, citing 'politicization' of China-linked donation
271 reading now
3
Tupperware shares tank as company warns it may go out of business
143 reading now
4
What we know about the leaked U.S. Pentagon documents on the Ukraine war — and potential impact
136 reading now
5
Manhattan district attorney sues Republican Jim Jordan over Trump prosecution
112 reading now
Footer Links
My Account
Profile
CBC Gem
Newsletters
About CBC Accounts
Connect with CBC
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
Mobile
RSS
Podcasts
Contact CBC
Submit Feedback
Help Centre
Audience Relations, CBC
P.O. Box 500 Station A
Toronto, ON
Canada, M5W 1E6

Toll-free (Canada only):
1-866-306-4636

About CBC
Corporate Info
Sitemap
Reuse & Permission
Terms of Use
Privacy
Jobs
Our Unions
Independent Producers
Political Ads Registry
AdChoices
Services
Ombudsman
Corrections and Clarifications
Public Appearances
Commercial Services
CBC Shop
Doing Business with Us
Renting Facilities
Radio Canada International
CBC Lite
Accessibility
It is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.

Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

About CBC Accessibility
Accessibility Feedback

©2023 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved.
Visitez Radio-Canada.ca
