Content
Skip to Main ContentAccessibility Help

MENU
Search
Sign In
news
Top Stories
Local
Climate
World
Canada
Politics
Indigenous
Opinion
The National
More 
Manitoba Indigenous Cultural Education Centre celebrates history in reopening exhibition | CBC News Loaded
Indigenous
Manitoba Indigenous Cultural Education Centre celebrates history in reopening exhibition
Social Sharing
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Reddit
LinkedIn
1,000 art pieces to be displayed in 10 exhibits, marking centre's reopening after 3 years

Samantha Schwientek · CBC News · Posted: Apr 06, 2023 1:48 PM EDT | Last Updated: April 7
Danielle Mason smiles during an interview at MICEC.
Danielle Mason, the collections and library assistant at MICEC, is curating 10 new exhibitions based on the 1,000 items at the centre. (Kevin Nepitabo/CBC)
The Manitoba Indigenous Cultural Education Centre (MICEC) in Winnipeg is back open to the public after three years of the pandemic. 

Not only is it back open, there are plans for 10 new exhibitions — and the first documents MICEC's own history as a non-profit organization that provides education and understanding of Indigenous culture.

A member of the public, Westin Sutherland, 23, from Peguis First Nation about 160 kilometres north of Winnipeg, said it was exciting to have the centre back open again.

"It's nice to finally be around fellow people that appreciate our culture and our languages and I'm just happy that we're all here together again," Sutherland said. 

"We need somewhere where we can learn about our culture, our languages, our history."

WATCH | Cultural education centre reopens:


Manitoba Indigenous Cultural Education Centre celebrates history in reopening exhibition
6 days ago
Duration2:01
The Manitoba Indigenous Cultural Education Centre has reopened to the public after three years of the pandemic.
Danielle Mason, the collections and library assistant at MICEC, curated the current exhibition, Walking With Our History: MICEC through the years.

The 23-year-old from Fisher River Cree Nation and Peguis First Nation said despite being closed to the public through most of the past three years, MICEC kept busy with online services — like languages tables — to protect the most vulnerable populations.

"We do work with a lot of elders, so we want to keep the space as safe for them as we possibly could and that meant keeping our doors closed longer than a lot of places," she said.

Several small groups of people stand around inside the centre.
After three years of being closed due to the Covid-19 pandemic, MICEC has reopened to the public. (Kevin Nepitabo/CBC)
Now that it's back open to the public, MICEC plans to display the over 1,000 art pieces at the centre in a series of 10 exhibits over the next year. 

Although she's primarily a textile artist, Mason said she's proud of her work on the exhibition. 

"I think it's a really nice illustration of not just the centre's history, but sort of the history of Winnipeg and the history of Indigenous art."

Mason said she hopes the collection inspires up-and-coming artists, draws more attention to the centre's work and "warms the hearts" of the artists whose work is on display. 

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Samantha Schwientek
Samantha Schwientek is a reporter with CBC Indigenous based in amiskwacîwâskahikan (Edmonton). She is a member of the Cayuga nation of the Six Nations of the Grand River, and previously worked at CBC Nova Scotia.

With files from Kevin Nepitabo

CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC News
Corrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report error
RELATED STORIES
Manitoba Indigenous Cultural Education Centre uses pandemic closure to digitize collection
Woman gets creative through TikTok, using new ways to share an old language
Popular Now in News
1
CBC INVESTIGATES
Troubled Calgary builder leaves Edmonton homebuyers with mortgages to pay on unfinished homes
355 reading now
2
Trudeau Foundation president, board resign, citing 'politicization' of China-linked donation
271 reading now
3
Tupperware shares tank as company warns it may go out of business
143 reading now
4
What we know about the leaked U.S. Pentagon documents on the Ukraine war — and potential impact
136 reading now
5
Manhattan district attorney sues Republican Jim Jordan over Trump prosecution
112 reading now
Footer Links
My Account
Profile
CBC Gem
Newsletters
About CBC Accounts
Connect with CBC
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
Mobile
RSS
Podcasts
Contact CBC
Submit Feedback
Help Centre
Audience Relations, CBC
P.O. Box 500 Station A
Toronto, ON
Canada, M5W 1E6

Toll-free (Canada only):
1-866-306-4636

About CBC
Corporate Info
Sitemap
Reuse & Permission
Terms of Use
Privacy
Jobs
Our Unions
Independent Producers
Political Ads Registry
AdChoices
Services
Ombudsman
Corrections and Clarifications
Public Appearances
Commercial Services
CBC Shop
Doing Business with Us
Renting Facilities
Radio Canada International
CBC Lite
Accessibility
It is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.

Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

About CBC Accessibility
Accessibility Feedback

©2023 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved.
Visitez Radio-Canada.ca
