Content
Skip to Main ContentAccessibility Help

MENU
Search
Sign In
news
Top Stories
Local
Climate
World
Canada
Politics
Indigenous
Opinion
The National
More 
Muslim groups promise to monitor Quebec ban on school prayer spaces | CBC News Loaded
Montreal
Muslim groups promise to monitor Quebec ban on school prayer spaces
Social Sharing
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Reddit
LinkedIn
National Council of Canadian Muslims says it would 'take action' if students rights are violated

Sidhartha Banerjee · The Canadian Press · Posted: Apr 11, 2023 7:19 AM EDT | Last Updated: April 11
Quebec Education Minister Bernard Drainville responds to the Opposition during question period at the legislature in Quebec City.
Quebec Education Minister Bernard Drainville promised to ban school service centres from transforming classrooms into places of prayer. (Jacques Boissinot/The Canadian Press)
Muslim groups are speaking out against the Quebec government's intention to ban prayer spaces in public schools, saying they will monitor how the Education Department enforces its new rules.

In response to reports that at least two Montreal-area schools had reserved spaces for Muslim students to pray, Education Minister Bernard Drainville promised last week to prohibit schools from doing so. The minister, however, said he wouldn't ban prayer altogether; students who wanted to pray should do so "discreetly" and "silently," he told reporters.

The National Council of Canadian Muslims said Monday it would keep tabs on how the government enforced the ban on prayer spaces, adding that it would "take action" if the rights of students were violated.

"We haven't actually seen how that is going to tangibly impact people," Stephen Brown, chief executive officer of the council, said in an interview. "So [if] these directives would in fact constitute in practice a limitation on people's fundamental rights, then we would do something, we would take action."

The Education Department did not respond on Monday to a request asking whether Drainville's directive had been implemented.

Schools aren't obligated to provide prayer space, lawyer says
Drainville's position hardened over a 24-hour period last week. His first response to the reports of school prayer spaces was to announce that schools could not privilege one religion over another and that they had to ensure the spaces respected gender equality.

But he quickly changed his mind after the Parti Québécois called for stronger measures, suggesting Drainville's original conciliatory stance would encourage more schools to open up prayer rooms.

Drainville is known for presenting a so-called values charter when he was in government with the PQ in 2013. The charter called for people who wear religious symbols to be prohibited from working in public institutions.

The charter was a precursor to the Coalition Avenir Québec (CAQ)'s secularism law — Bill 21 — which was passed in 2019 and prohibits many public servants, including teachers, from wearing religious symbols at work. The minister joined the CAQ ahead of the 2022 election.

An older man with a briefcase.
Constitutional lawyer Julius Grey says the government could be in legal trouble, however, if it prevents students from praying altogether. (Ivanoh Demers/Radio-Canada)
Civil rights lawyer Julius Grey said Quebec schools — regardless of Bill 21 — have no obligation to open spaces dedicated to prayer. The government could be in legal trouble, however, if it prevents students from praying altogether.

"What would be totally contrary to the Charter —and I think will get struck down — is a prohibition on individuals praying in schools," Grey said in an interview Monday. "I don't think they'll do that. I think that would be asking for a challenge."

Drainville's decision last week was denounced by a group of Muslim organizations and mosques — Table de concertation des organismes musulmans —which said the minister should have met with community leaders before prohibiting school prayer spaces.

Quebec Muslim associations denounce government ban on prayer rooms in schools
Montreal Imam Hassan Guillet described the situation as a "tempest in teacup," saying media organizations and politicians had suggested there was something nefarious about Muslim students praying at school.

In Islam, people pray five times a day and during Ramadan, there's an uptick in people who pray, he said. While people are fasting — which is required during Ramadan from dawn to sunset — some people opt to pray during those intervals, he added.

"My message to the Quebec government is to be practical, to respect citizens, all citizens, regardless of their religion or their faith or their origin. The government is the government of everybody," Guillet said in an interview Monday. "Secularism is not a carte blanche to erase religion or religious practice."

CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC News
Corrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report error
RELATED STORIES
Justin Trudeau stands by appointee Amira Elghawaby, says she will continue fight against Islamophobia
Quebec Court of Appeal to evaluate whether secularism law unfairly targets Muslim women
Quebec Muslim associations denounce government ban on prayer rooms in schools
6 years later, ceremony held inside Quebec City mosque to honour victims of 2017 attack
Popular Now in News
1
CBC INVESTIGATES
Troubled Calgary builder leaves Edmonton homebuyers with mortgages to pay on unfinished homes
355 reading now
2
Trudeau Foundation president, board resign, citing 'politicization' of China-linked donation
271 reading now
3
Tupperware shares tank as company warns it may go out of business
143 reading now
4
What we know about the leaked U.S. Pentagon documents on the Ukraine war — and potential impact
136 reading now
5
Manhattan district attorney sues Republican Jim Jordan over Trump prosecution
112 reading now
Footer Links
My Account
Profile
CBC Gem
Newsletters
About CBC Accounts
Connect with CBC
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
Mobile
RSS
Podcasts
Contact CBC
Submit Feedback
Help Centre
Audience Relations, CBC
P.O. Box 500 Station A
Toronto, ON
Canada, M5W 1E6

Toll-free (Canada only):
1-866-306-4636

About CBC
Corporate Info
Sitemap
Reuse & Permission
Terms of Use
Privacy
Jobs
Our Unions
Independent Producers
Political Ads Registry
AdChoices
Services
Ombudsman
Corrections and Clarifications
Public Appearances
Commercial Services
CBC Shop
Doing Business with Us
Renting Facilities
Radio Canada International
CBC Lite
Accessibility
It is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.

Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

About CBC Accessibility
Accessibility Feedback

©2023 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved.
Visitez Radio-Canada.ca
