Content
Skip to Main ContentAccessibility Help

MENU
Search
Sign In
news
Top Stories
Local
Climate
World
Canada
Politics
Indigenous
Opinion
The National
More 
Applications from Ontario high school students up 10.5% at Laurentian University | CBC News Loaded
Sudbury
Applications from Ontario high school students up 10.5% at Laurentian University
Social Sharing
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Reddit
LinkedIn
Last year, number of high school student applications to the Sudbury university were down 43.5%
CBC News · Posted: Apr 11, 2023 2:08 PM EDT | Last Updated: 8 hours ago
Student with helmet walking into Laurentian University
Laurentian University interim president Sheila Embleton says they had more visitors during their latest March open house than they did before the COVID-19 pandemic and insolvency. (Erik White/CBC )

 comments
Laurentian University has had a 10.5 per cent increase in applications from Ontario high school students this year, a sign the Sudbury, Ont., university is rebuilding, according to its interim president.

Laurentian reported 3,151 applications this year from those students, up from 2,851 in 2022. However, the numbers are still short of the 4,942 Ontario high school students who applied to Laurentian in January 2021.

Laurentian filed for insolvency on Feb. 1, 2021. That April, it cut 76 programs and 195 staff and faculty members lost their jobs.

On Nov. 28, 2022, Laurentian exited the Companies' Creditors Arrangement Act (CCAA) restructuring process that followed its insolvency.

A woman in a purple blouse.
Embleton is a linguistics professor who has previously served as vice-president of academics and provost at York University in Toronto. (Submitted by Laurentian University)
Laurentian's interim president, Sheila Embleton, said the recent uptick in applications from Ontario high school students is a positive sign.

"Remember also that there are fewer programs than there were several years ago, and so naturally there will be fewer students because of that," she said.

"But the rebuild has certainly begun and we're hoping that the trend continues."

Embleton said Laurentian's most recent March open house — when prospective students and their parents visit the university campus — had better numbers than in 2018 and 2019, before it filed for insolvency and cut programs.

"So I think that that signals that the future is getting better."

Embleton joined Laurentian on Jan. 1, 2023, and said while she wasn't there for the cuts to programs and staff, she could imagine the trauma it caused those employees and the university community.

"What I can say is in these last three months, I've really seen signs that give me confidence in the future of the university," she said.

Laurentian real estate
While Laurentian has exited its insolvency proceedings, it continues to review its real estate holdings to help pay its creditors.

In February, the university announced it would sell the president's house, which it purchased in 1965 for $130,000.

Last May, the provincial government said it would purchase $53.5-million of Laurentian real estate, although it hasn't shared more details since then.

Laurentian University hiring for 10 new faculty positions as it rebuilds
Laurentian University highlights successful recruitment events as it exits insolvency
Embleton said it's unlikely any of the core buildings on campus would be up for sale.

"I think in the end we'll see surprisingly little change because of some of the various leasing arrangements that we have now," she said.

"We may just see some of them the other way round and so on."

With files from Markus Schwabe

CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC News
Corrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report error
Popular Now in News
1
CBC INVESTIGATES
Troubled Calgary builder leaves Edmonton homebuyers with mortgages to pay on unfinished homes
355 reading now
2
Trudeau Foundation president, board resign, citing 'politicization' of China-linked donation
271 reading now
3
Tupperware shares tank as company warns it may go out of business
143 reading now
4
What we know about the leaked U.S. Pentagon documents on the Ukraine war — and potential impact
136 reading now
5
Manhattan district attorney sues Republican Jim Jordan over Trump prosecution
112 reading now
COMMENTS
To encourage thoughtful and respectful conversations, first and last names will appear with each submission to CBC/Radio-Canada's online communities (except in children and youth-oriented communities). Pseudonyms will no longer be permitted.

By submitting a comment, you accept that CBC has the right to reproduce and publish that comment in whole or in part, in any manner CBC chooses. Please note that CBC does not endorse the opinions expressed in comments. Comments on this story are moderated according to our Submission Guidelines. Comments are welcome while open. We reserve the right to close comments at any time.

Become a CBC Account Holder
Join the conversation  Create account

Already have an account?Log in

Loading...
Footer Links
My Account
Profile
CBC Gem
Newsletters
About CBC Accounts
Connect with CBC
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
Mobile
RSS
Podcasts
Contact CBC
Submit Feedback
Help Centre
Audience Relations, CBC
P.O. Box 500 Station A
Toronto, ON
Canada, M5W 1E6

Toll-free (Canada only):
1-866-306-4636

About CBC
Corporate Info
Sitemap
Reuse & Permission
Terms of Use
Privacy
Jobs
Our Unions
Independent Producers
Political Ads Registry
AdChoices
Services
Ombudsman
Corrections and Clarifications
Public Appearances
Commercial Services
CBC Shop
Doing Business with Us
Renting Facilities
Radio Canada International
CBC Lite
Accessibility
It is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.

Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

About CBC Accessibility
Accessibility Feedback

©2023 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved.
Visitez Radio-Canada.ca
