Content
Skip to Main ContentAccessibility Help

MENU
Search
Sign In
news
Top Stories
Local
Climate
World
Canada
Politics
Indigenous
Opinion
The National
More 
'Intense' competition pushes eastern Ontario communities to lure family doctors with cash | CBC News Loaded
Ottawa
'Intense' competition pushes eastern Ontario communities to lure family doctors with cash
Social Sharing
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Reddit
LinkedIn
Addressing access to health care should be provincial responsibility, researchers say
Ben Andrews · CBC News · Posted: Apr 11, 2023 4:00 AM EDT | Last Updated: April 11
A stethoscope lies on a table.
A competitive market is pitting municipalities against each other in creative attempts to lure family doctors. (Carl Court/Getty Images)
As mayor of Quinte West, Jim Harrison says he's offered doctors everything from a boat slip to a temporary apartment in an effort to convince them to move to the city.

Although Harrison doesn't view it as a competition, he said the scarcity of doctors creates a big issue: a competitive market is pitting municipalities in Ontario against each other in creative attempts to lure family doctors.

"We've got to do everything we can to get the doctor to stay here — not just to come here," Harrison said.

Quinte West, located on the shore of Lake Ontario about 20 kilometres west of Belleville, currently offers physicians a financial incentive of $100,000 in exchange for a five-year commitment to the city.

Although no official statistics about the incentives doctors are tempted with exist in the province, multiple sources who spoke to CBC said the practice appears to be growing in eastern Ontario.

Candid photo of Jim Harrison, Mayor of Quinte West.
Jim Harrison, mayor of Quinte West, says competition for family doctors is 'intense.' (Submitted by City of Quinte West)
The Ontario College of Family Physicians estimates more than 2 million Ontarians are without a family doctor, and those shortages are felt more acutely in rural and remote parts of the province.

Faced with a limited supply of physicians and a suite of provincial programs that are not fully addressing gaps in rural and remote areas, municipalities are deploying resources of their own.

In many cases, that comes in the form of direct payments.

Upping the incentive
On March 28, Hastings County council voted to approve a budget that would see its physician incentive program increase from $100,000 to $150,000 for a minimum four-year commitment.

It also added another $75,000 incentive to help cover relocation costs for licensed doctors returning from elsewhere in Canada or overseas.

The county and its 14 small communities north of Belleville have been doling out the payment since 2006.

Family doctor shortage creates stress for patients, communities — and physicians
A deficit of doctors is pitting N.L. communities against each other, warn mayors
At the time, Hastings County intentionally took a "long-term view" by targeting medical school students rather than established doctors, according to the county's chief administrative officer Jim Pine.

Such an approach, Pine said, avoids stealing physicians from neighbouring municipalities.

"We wanted to make sure that we didn't create a problem for another community by luring away or attracting an existing family doctor," he said.

The recent incentive increase isn't unprecedented in Hastings County. It previously offered $150,000 but reduced the total in 2017, hoping the lower amount would be enough of a draw.

"Because of all the competition, that really hasn't panned out," Pine said.

The competition
In the years since Hastings County implemented its program, neighbouring municipalities have introduced their own.

"The competition factor is very high," Harrison said. "It's very intense."

Nearby Kingston, for example, also offers $100,000 for the same five-year commitment. Belleville, meanwhile, offers $150,000 for six years.

The council of North Grenville, a township bordering Ottawa to the south, passed its own $100,000 incentive in March.

Stethoscope hanging in a medical clinic
Arthur Sweetman, a professor of health human resources at McMaster University, said he believes the onus for ensuring equitable access to medical care should fall on the province. (Don Sommers/CBC)
Generally, these incentives are also coupled with breaks on rent or other measures designed to save money for doctors.

Pine said Hastings County has successfully signed 21 candidates since debuting the program and retained 16.

"When we started all those years ago, we were hopeful that if we were able to attract one to our rural communities, we would have considered it a success," he said.

"It's been a really good program over the years for us."

Onus should be on province, prof says
The distribution of physicians across the province is related to socioeconomic status — in other words, poorer municipalities are more likely to suffer from doctor shortages than richer ones.

Direct municipal cash incentives for doctors may only make that reality worse, said Arthur Sweetman, a professor of health human resources at McMaster University.

The 'dire' doctor shortage in rural northwestern Ontario: 5 proposed solutions
Why financial incentives aren't enough to deal with health-care staffing shortages
Although Sweetman doesn't blame local politicians for using the resources available to them, he said a broader issue arises when some municipalities lack the means to offer alluring cash incentives.

"I don't think that's how we want to be thinking about Canada's publicly funded health-care system," Sweetman said.

"The province should be dealing with it in a way that's equitable and not dependent on the tax base of a particular neighbourhood."

Sweetman said he believes the onus for ensuring equitable access to medical care should fall on the province — and that starts with training and licensing more physicians.

Ontario currently administers three programs designed to redistribute doctors to underserved areas, including payments of up to $117,600 over four years depending on the remoteness of the community.

A spokesperson for the Ontario Ministry of Health said the province is leading the country in ensuring access to a family doctor or primary health-care provider.

"We have launched the largest medical school expansion in Ontario in over a decade," a spokesperson wrote in an email.

The province also touted its work to make it easier for internationally educated doctors to practise in Ontario.

Communities 'get desperate,' doc says
Those provincial offerings are "pretty paltry" compared to what wealthier communities can scrape together, said Peter Englert, a retired family doctor and the Ontario representative for the Society of Rural Physicians of Canada.

Englert said provincial bonuses for doctors practising in rural areas haven't increased in decades and that makes communities "desperate."

"It's a terrible state of affairs."

A headshot of Peter Englert, a retired family doctor and the Ontario representative of the Society of Rural Physicians.
Peter Englert, a retired family doctor and the Ontario representative of the Society of Rural Physicians, says competition for family doctors causes some municipalities to become 'desperate.' (Submitted by Peter Englert)
Local cash incentives aren't new, according to Englert.

Instead, he said, doctor shortages and provincial policies that make it more difficult for rural practices to turn a profit are driving up competitiveness.

Under those conditions, family doctors become "more mobile," Englert said.

"You're there for a while and then, you know, another community offers a much better deal, and away you go," he said. "You can't blame people for taking a better job."

Increasing provincial incentives would "be a nice little carrot," he said, but that won't solve the issue.

"You're on a level playing field with, you know, large communities and big cities," he said. "Which is really hard for the rural areas."

In Quinte West, Harrison said he's often up against nearby cities with deeper pockets offering bonuses of their own.

"If we have to make an adjustment in some of our prices to attract them, that's something we would certainly consider," he said.

CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC News
Corrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report error
RELATED STORIES
Family doctor shortage creates stress for patients, communities — and physicians
Why financial incentives aren't enough to deal with health-care staffing shortages
This rural family doctor would like to retire — he's 80
VIDEO A day in the life of a family doctor
CBC INVESTIGATES Only a handful of family doctors in Ottawa accepting new patients
Kingston, Ont., has a profound doctor shortage. Here's why
Phones ringing off the hook at medical clinic taking new patients
Popular Now in News
1
CBC INVESTIGATES
Troubled Calgary builder leaves Edmonton homebuyers with mortgages to pay on unfinished homes
355 reading now
2
Trudeau Foundation president, board resign, citing 'politicization' of China-linked donation
271 reading now
3
Tupperware shares tank as company warns it may go out of business
143 reading now
4
What we know about the leaked U.S. Pentagon documents on the Ukraine war — and potential impact
136 reading now
5
Manhattan district attorney sues Republican Jim Jordan over Trump prosecution
112 reading now
Footer Links
My Account
Profile
CBC Gem
Newsletters
About CBC Accounts
Connect with CBC
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
Mobile
RSS
Podcasts
Contact CBC
Submit Feedback
Help Centre
Audience Relations, CBC
P.O. Box 500 Station A
Toronto, ON
Canada, M5W 1E6

Toll-free (Canada only):
1-866-306-4636

About CBC
Corporate Info
Sitemap
Reuse & Permission
Terms of Use
Privacy
Jobs
Our Unions
Independent Producers
Political Ads Registry
AdChoices
Services
Ombudsman
Corrections and Clarifications
Public Appearances
Commercial Services
CBC Shop
Doing Business with Us
Renting Facilities
Radio Canada International
CBC Lite
Accessibility
It is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.

Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

About CBC Accessibility
Accessibility Feedback

©2023 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved.
Visitez Radio-Canada.ca
